Add blog post for Raptor to RaptorX evolution (#161)
prestodb/prestodb.github.io: website/blog/2022-01-31-avoid-data-silos-in-presto-in-meta.md

---
title: Avoid Data Silos in Presto in Meta: the journey from Raptor to RaptorX
author: Rongrong Zhong
authorURL: https://www.linkedin.com/in/rongrong-zhong-31aa8a8/
---
**Alluxio**: Rongrong Zhong
**Meta**: James Sun, Ke Wang

*Raptor* is a Presto connector ([presto-raptor](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/tree/master/presto-raptor)) that used to power some critical

> interactive query workloads in Meta (previously Facebook). Though referred to in the ICDE 2019 paper, it remains somewhat mysterious to many

Reviewer: > ICDE 2019 paper

link maybe?

> Presto users because  there was no available documentation for this feature. This article will shed some light on the history of Raptor, and why

Reviewer: > because  there

two spaces

> Presto users because  there was no available documentation for this feature. This article will shed some light on the history of Raptor, and why

Author: well, i guess there still is no documentation. The Appendix is trying to provide some explanation to it.

Meta eventually replaced  it in favor of a new architecture based on local caching, namely RaptorX.

![Raptor Timeline](/img/blog/2022-01-31-avoid-data-silos-in-presto-in-meta/timeline.png)

## The story of Raptor

Generally speaking, Presto as a query engine does not own storage. Instead, connectors were developed to query different external data sources.
This framework is very flexible, but in disaggregated compute and storage architectures, it makes low latency guarantees hard to achieve due to the

> network / storage latency. To address this limitation, Raptor is designed as a shared-nothing storage engine for Presto.

Author: Raptor to Presto is kinda like innodb to MySQL. So it's a storage engine as in "storage engine for SQL database". The scheduling and co-location of storage and compute is not Raptor specific. You can actually make presto run hdfs clusters and colocate compute and storage that way too. That's a scheduling feature in the core engine.

### Motivation – an initial use case in the AB testing framework

<!--truncate-->

> In Meta, new product features typically  go through AB testing before they are released more broadly. The AB testing framework allows engineers to configure

Reviewer: > typically  go

two spaces

> experiments by rolling out the feature to a test group, and monitors key metrics against a control group. The framework provides engineers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
experiments that roll out a new feature to a test group, and then monitors key metrics against a control group. The framework provides engineers
```

with a UI to analyze their experiment’s statistics, which converts the configurations to Presto queries. The query shapes are known and limited.

> Queries typically join multiple large data sets, which include user, device, test, and event attributes, etc. The basic requirements for this use case are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Queries typically join multiple large data sets, which include user, device, test, event attributes, etc. The basic requirements for this use case are:
```

> 1. **Losslessness**: data need to be complete and accurate

Reviewer 2: Losslessness sounds awkward and I am not 100% sure why accuracy needs to be called out so here is a random suggestion.
```suggestion
1. **Accurate**: data need to be complete, accurate, and can't be approximate
```

Author: I think i used the word from historical documents. Compare to other alternatives like scuba, puma, etc, which can be lossy.

2. **Flexibility**: users should be able to perform arbitrary slice and dice on their results
3. **Freshness**: test results should be available within hours

> 4. **Interactive latency**: Query needs to return results within seconds

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. **Interactive latency**: Queries need to return results within seconds
```

5. **High availability**: As a critical service for product development, there should be minimal downtime for the service.

Presto in a typical warehouse setting (i.e., using Hive connector to query warehouse data directly) could easily meet the first two requirements but not

> the rest. At that time there was no near-real-time data ingestion and most warehouse data were ingested daily, thus not satisfying the freshness requirement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the rest. At that time there was no near-real-time data ingestion and most warehouse data was ingested daily, thus not satisfying the freshness requirement.
```

> Meta's data center was already moving to disaggregated compute / storage architecture, thus hard to guarantee latency when scanning large tables with high

Reviewer 2: Disagregation and QoS and consistent low latency are actually somewhat separate concerns? It's that the tech available at the time couldn't offer it.
```suggestion
Meta's data centers were already moving to a disaggregated compute / storage architecture that could not guarantee latency when scanning large tables at high
```

QPS. Typical Presto deployment would stop the whole cluster, thus not satisfying HA requirements.

To support this critical use case, we began the journey of productionizing Raptor.

### Raptor Architecture
Following is the high level architecture of a Presto cluster with Raptor connector.

![Raptor Architecture](/img/blog/2022-01-31-avoid-data-silos-in-presto-in-meta/raptor_architecture.png)

Raptor connector uses MySQL as its metastore, storing table and file metadata. Table data is stored on flash disks on each worker node and periodically

> backed up to an external storage system to enable recovery in case of worker node crash. Data is ingested into the Raptor cluster in mini batches with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
backed up to an external storage system to enable recovery in case of a worker node crashing. Data is ingested into the Raptor cluster in small enough batches to provide
```

> minutes-level latency, providing freshness. A standby cluster is created to provide high availability (HA).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 minute level latency, providing freshness. A standby cluster is created to provide high availability (HA).
```

> For more information of Raptor storage engine, read [Appendix - Raptor Architecture Details](#raptor-architecture-details) or watch [Appendix - Raptor Talk](#raptor-talk). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information on the Raptor storage engine, read [Appendix - Raptor Architecture Details](#raptor-architecture-details) or watch [Appendix - Raptor Talk](#raptor-talk). 
```

### Limitations
Having compute/storage collocated, Raptor clusters can support low-latency high-throughput query workloads. However, the flip side of collocation is also significant.

#### Low cluster utilization

> The size of a Raptor cluster is typically decided by how much data there is. As the tables grow, more worker nodes are needed due to the collocated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The size of a Raptor cluster is typically decided by how much data needs to be stored. As the tables grow, more worker nodes are needed due to the collocated
```

compute/storage, which also creates challenges to repurpose these machines for other uses even when the cluster is idle.
#### Low tail performance
Because data is hard allocated to worker nodes, if a worker node is down or slow, it will inevitably affect query performance, making it hard to provide
stable tail performance.
#### High engineering overhead
Raptor requires a lot of storage engine specific features and processes like data ingestion / eviction, data compaction, data backup / restoration, data
security, etc. For a disaggregated Presto cluster directly querying Meta’s data warehouse, all of these services are managed by dedicated teams and

> improvements benefit all use cases. Same cannot be said for Raptor, which resulted in engineering overhead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
improvements benefit all use cases. The same cannot be said for Raptor, which resulted in engineering overhead.
```

thus keeping hot data on the compute nodes. The advantages of using local flash as caching rather than storage engine are:
* It is no longer necessary for Presto to manage data lifecycle
* Query performance is less affected by data loss due to single worker failure
* Caching as a feature in the filesystem layer, is part of the presto-hive connector, thus the architecture of a RaptorX cluster is similar to other warehouse
presto clusters, reducing operational overhead.

### RaptorX Architecture
Following is the architecture of RaptorX:

![RaptorX Architecture](/img/blog/2022-01-31-avoid-data-silos-in-presto-in-meta/raptorx_architecture.png)

The fundamental difference between Raptor and Raptor X is how the local SSDs on workers are used. In RaptorX, Presto workers use [Alluxio](www.alluxio.io) to cache
file data locally. It is well understood that access patterns for different table columns could be very different, and columnar file formats
like ORC and Parquet are commonly used for data files to increase data locality within files. By caching file fragments in small page size on top of columnar files,

> only data that are frequently accessed will be kept close to compute. Presto coordinator tries to schedule compute that processes the same data to the same worker node to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
only data that is frequently accessed will be kept close to compute. The Presto coordinator tries to schedule compute that processes the same data to the same worker node to
```

> increase cache effectiveness. RaptorX also implements file footer and metadata caching, and other smart caching strategies that would improve

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
increase cache effectiveness. RaptorX also implements file footer and metadata caching, and other smart caching strategies that improve
```

the performance further.

> For more details about RaptorX architecture, please read the blog [RaptorX: Building a 10X Faster Presto](https://prestodb.io/blog/2021/02/04/raptorx).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more details about the RaptorX architecture, please read the [RaptorX: Building a 10X Faster Presto](https://prestodb.io/blog/2021/02/04/raptorx).
```

### RaptorX vs Raptor performance benchmark

> We ran benchmarks to compare the performance of prototyped RaptorX against Raptor. The benchmark is run on a cluster with ~1000 worker nodes and a single coordinator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We ran benchmarks to compare the performance of a RaptorX prototype against Raptor. The benchmark is run on a cluster with ~1000 worker nodes and a single coordinator.
```

Raptor and RaptorX are using the same hardware, so the whole dataset fits in RaptorX local SSD cache, thus cache hit rate is close to 100%.

![Benchmark](/img/blog/2022-01-31-avoid-data-silos-in-presto-in-meta/benchmark.png)

As you can see from the benchmark result, P90 latency has an almost 2x improvement for RaptorX compared to Raptor. The difference between average query latency
and P90 query latency in RaptorX is much smaller compared to Raptor. This is because in Raptor, data is physically bound to the worker node hosting it, thus a
slow node would inevitably affect query latency. In RaptorX, instead of hard affinity between worker and data, we use soft affinity when scheduling. Soft affinity
will select two worker nodes as candidates to process a split. If the first choice worker node is up and healthy, that node would be chosen, otherwise a secondary

> node will be chosen. Data can potentially be cached at multiple nodes, and scheduling can optimize for better CPU load balancing for the overall workloads.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
node will be chosen. Data can potentially be cached at multiple nodes, and scheduling can optimize for better CPU load balancing for the overall workload.
```

### Migration from Raptor to RaptorX
All previous Raptor use cases in Meta are migrated to RaptorX, which provides better user experience and is easy to scale.

#### A/B Testing Framework
In the previous section we mentioned that the requirements for the A/B testing framework are: losslessness, flexibility, freshness, interactive latency and high availability.

> Since RaptorX is a caching layer on the original Hive data, losslessness is guaranteed by Hive. It enjoys all the query optimization from the core presto engine, as well as many

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since RaptorX is a caching layer on the original Hive data, losslessness is guaranteed by Hive. It enjoys all the query optimization from the core Presto engine, as well as many
```

> specific optimizations in Hive connector. Benchmark shows that the query latency is comparable with Raptor, with tail latency improvements. For freshness requirements, we were

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
specific optimizations in the Hive connector. Benchmark shows that both average and P90 query latency is better than Raptor. For freshness requirements, we were
```

able to benefit from Meta’s near real time warehouse data ingestion framework improvements, which improved data freshness for all Hive data. High availability was guaranteed with
a standby cluster, same as in Raptor.

During the process of migration, traffic to the framework grew to 2X due to great user experience and organic growth. RaptorX clusters were able to support the extra traffic
with the same capacity as Raptor clusters pre-migration. The clusters’ CPU capacity were fully utilized without worrying about storage limitations.

#### Dashboard

> Another typical use case of Raptor in Meta is for better dashboard experience. Presto is used to power many of the dashboarding use cases in Meta, and some data engineering

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another typical use case of Raptor in Meta is improving the dashboard experience. Presto is used to power many of the dashboarding use cases in Meta, and some data engineering
```

teams choose to inject their pre-aggregated tables to dedicated Raptor clusters for better performance. By migrating to RaptorX, data engineers can remove the ingestion step
and no longer need to worry about data consistency between base tables and the pre-aggregated tables, while also enjoying around 30% query latency reduction in most percentiles
beyond P50.

### Beyond the scope of Raptor

> Since RaptorX is very easy to use, as a booster on normal Hive connector workloads, we also enabled it for Meta's warehouse interactive workloads. These are multitenant clusters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since RaptorX is very easy to use as a booster on normal Hive connector workloads, we also enabled it for Meta's warehouse interactive workloads. These are multitenant clusters
```

that handle pretty much all non-ETL queries to Hive data through Presto, ranging from Tableau, internal dashboards, various auto-generated UI analytics queries, various in-house

> tooling generated workloads, pipeline prototyping, debugging, data exploration, etc. RaptorX is enabled for these clusters to provide opportunistic boost to queries that hit the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tooling generated workloads, pipeline prototyping, debugging, data exploration, etc. RaptorX is enabled for these clusters to provide an opportunistic boost to queries that hit the
```

same data set.

## Appendix
### Raptor Architecture Details
#### Data Organization

![Data Organization](/img/blog/2022-01-31-avoid-data-silos-in-presto-in-meta/raptor_storage.png)

Raptor tables are hash bucketed. Data from the same bucket is stored on the same worker node. Multiple tables bucketed on the same columns are called a
*distribution*. A table bucket can contain multiple shards. *Shard* is the basic immutable unit of Raptor data. A shard is stored as a file in ORC format.
Tables can also have sorting properties, which allows better query optimization.

#### Execution optimizations

> Raptor as a native storage engine for Presto allows Presto to schedule computation onto data nodes, thus provides low-latency, high-throughput data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Raptor as a native storage engine for Presto allows Presto to schedule computation onto data nodes, thus providing low-latency, high-throughput data
```
